# pgCrab

**Note: this is alpha-grade software, bodged together quickly because I needed it quickly. Some modules were generated by LLM.**

A simple but helpful linter and documentation tool for Postgres database schemas.

Helps cure crabbiness around schema exploration and some avoidable performance production issues.
Don't get woken up in the middle of the night for something you could have avoided with a bit of static analysis.

## What can pgCrab do?

### Generate documentation for your schema

pgCrab can connect to a database loaded with your schema and generate documentation for it.

Comments for each table and column will be collected from the database's built-in description
fields (set using `COMMENT ON`), but you can also harvest missing comments
from SQL comments (`--`) in your schema files.

You can provide a custom template, but by default Markdown will be emitted, suitable for embedding
in mdBook or other Markdown-based tools.

The documentation page includes all tables, with their:
  - comments;
  - columns (with datatypes and comments);
  - indices;
  - primary keys;
  - foreign keys; and
  - check constraints.

Foreign key relationships are documented in both directions, so it's easy to navigate via backreferences.

```
# uses libpq-compatible environment variables
pgcrab doc gen [--template <jinja template file>] [--harvest <path to SQL directory or files>]

# Postgres connection URI
pgcrab [-C postgres://user:pass@host/dbname] doc gen [--template <jinja template file>] [--harvest <path to SQL directory or files>]
```

### List uncommented items

Follows the same command structure as `pgcrab doc gen` but instead provides a list of uncommented items
in your database.

Exit code 1 when there is at least one uncommented item.

```
# uses libpq-compatible environment variables
pgcrab doc uncommented [--from-sql <path to SQL directory or files>]

# Postgres connection URI
pgcrab [-C postgres://user:pass@host/dbname] doc uncommented [--from-sql <path to SQL directory or files>] [postgres://user:pass@host/dbname]
```

### Lint your database schema for problems and suspicious things

You will need to set up a local Postgres instance with your schema loaded for linting.

```
# uses libpq-compatible environment variables
pgcrab lint-schema

# Postgres connection URI
pgcrab [-C postgres://user:pass@host/dbname] lint-schema
```

Many thanks to [pg-index-health-sql](https://github.com/mfvanek/pg-index-health-sql/), from which most of the lint rules were taken!

<details>
<summary>

**List of schema lint rules (click to expand):**

</summary>

| **Lint ID** | **Description** | **References** |
|:------------|-----------------|----------------|
| `blah` | Blah | Blah |

</details>

### Lint SQL queries in your Rust or Python source code

_This feature is still quite primitive._

pgCrab can read your Rust and Python source code, looking for embedded SQL.

It can then check for a very small number of antipatterns.

```
pgcrab lint-sql path/to/code/directory
```

<details>
<summary>

**List of SQL lint rules (click to expand):**

</summary>

| **Lint ID** | **Description** | **References** |
|:------------|-----------------|----------------|
| `blah` | Blah | Blah |

</details>

Known issues and caveats:
- the reporting of error locations is not entirely exact,
  but hopefully close enough to give you an idea.
  Essentially: escape sequences such as `\n` will

### Convert SQL comments (`--`) to real schema `COMMENT`s (descriptions)

It's quite painful to use the `COMMENT ON` feature in Postgres, because you
have to write a statement for every item you are describing.
You also can't do it in the same statement as creating every item.

To help with this, you can have pgCrab harvest comments from your SQL migrations
and convert them to `COMMENT ON` statements.

This is not as portable as using `COMMENT ON` but it might help some projects
that currently don't use `COMMENT ON` anyway because it is verbose and not
interoperable with SQLite.

```
pgcrab doc convert path/to/schema/migration/directory/ > comment.sql
```

If you want to skip lines that would apply a COMMENT that already exists, then
use the `--compare` flag and ensure to either pass a database connection via `-C`
or by libpq environment variables.

```
pgcrab [-C postgres://user:pass@host/dbname] doc convert path/to/schema/migration/directory/ --compare > comments.sql
```


# Installation



## Nix

TODO

## Docker/Podman/Containers

TODO

## Use in GitHub Actions

TODO

## Build Locally

With `cargo` installed, you can get `pgcrab` on your `PATH` with:

```
cargo install --path .
```


# Licence

TODO


# Contributions

TODO

# Thanks

- [pg-index-health-sql](https://github.com/mfvanek/pg-index-health-sql/), from which many lint rules were takens

---

under construction:

# Postgres Schema Documenter

This simple tool helps you generate a document that describes your Postgres schema.

**Features:**

- Customisable templating
  - with included template for: Markdown
- Show tables, with their comments, columns (and their types and comments), as well as indices and foreign key constraints.


## Usage

**Document a database:**

```
postgres_schema_documenter -C 'postgresql://user@host:port/dbname' doc --template basic_md_template.md.j2 > my_database_doc.md
```

Note: the connection string `postgresql:` is sufficient to use the libpq environment variables
as connection details.


**List items in the database that are missing comments:**

```
postgres_schema_documenter -C 'postgresql://user@host:port/dbname' list-uncommented
```


## Installation

### from source

`cargo install --path .` to install to your user,
or `cargo build --release` to just get a release build in your target directory.

You can use `cargo run -- <args>` to run from the source checkout.


### from binary

TODO


### as a Docker/Podman/OCI container

TODO
